

This case arises under the employee protection provisions of the SurfaceTransportation Assistance Act of 1982 (STAA), as amended.1 Bernadine PoulterSTAA’s implementing regulations). (Complainant) filed a complaint with the United States Department of Labor’sOccupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) on December 21, 2015, alleging that Central Cal Transportation, LLC and Ryan Rotan violated the employee protection provisions of the STAA by terminating her employment in retaliation for raising safety concerns.

Following a hearing on her complaint, a Department of Labor AdministrativeLaw Judge (ALJ) issued a Decision and Order (D. & O.) concluding thatRespondents violated the STAA, ordering Respondents to reinstate Complainant, and awarding damages and attorney’s fees.

Respondents appealed the D. & O. to the Administrative Review Board (ARB or Board). For the following reasons we reverse the ALJ’s ruling and dismiss the complaint.




Respondent, Central Cal Transportation, LLC (Central Cal), is an intermodal transport trucking company, and at all relevant times, the employer of Respondent,Ryan Rotan, who worked as a Terminal Manager.2 Although Respondent Rotan did not hold a commercial driver’s license, his duties included dispatching trucks, assigning work, and managing requests from shippers.3Complainant was a truck driver employed by Central Cal starting in June 2015.4 Complainant received her commercial driver’s license in October 2012, and had worked as a truck driver before she joined Central Cal.52. IncidentOn December 18, 2015, after completing the first load of the day,Complainant was tasked to haul a second load.6 Complainant drove from Sparks,Nevada approximately 200 miles to Lathrop, California.7 The second load of the day contained Michelin tires, and she picked up the sealed intermodal container unit somewhere between 11:00 a.m. and noon at the BNSF rail yard in Lathrop,California.8 She then proceeded directly to the truck scales in Stockton, California.9Under applicable Department of Transportation and California state regulations, the maximum total gross weight for a truck and its load operating on an interstate highway is 80,000 pounds.10 The regulations also require that the maximum gross weight permitted on any one axle is no greater than 20,000 pounds, and the maximum weight on tandem axles is no greater than 34,000 pounds.11Although Complainant’s total vehicle gross weight for her second load was approximately 4,000 pounds under the legal limit, the weight was not evenly distributed.12 Apparently, during transit, the tires had piled up within the sealed container toward the back doors so that the weight on the trailer (tandem) axle was well within regulatory limits.13Complainant sent the dispatcher (Respondent Rotan) a text message to inform him of the overweight condition of the trailer axle, and it led to the following series of texts.14Complainant: “Overweight. 600 in rear!!!!”Nevada and Lathrop, California is approximately 200 miles.

Respondent Rotan: “Send scale ticket.”

Complainant: “Just did. U have. Em if u got this message. !”Respondent Rotan: “Try to slam it. You can legal 34500”Complainant: “Nope. Nit gonna. Move.”Respondent Rotan: “No you need to know what is legal and what is not. overweight.”Complainant: “Well. That’s. Not true. ! I’ve drop it at comtrac. And u can’t. Make. Me run a over weight Load... Only the front axle can legally. Go over the back 2 NOT…..Am I bob tail home. Or r u sending.

Me. Another. Load?”

Respondent Rotan: “You need to call the office.”

At the hearing, Respondent Rotan testified that his purpose in directingComplainant to call was to specifically clarify that he was not instructing her to drive an overweight load.15 During the call, Respondent Rotan directedComplainant to try to shift the location of the tires in the load, by using forward momentum with an abrupt stop, to redistribute the load forward and shift some of the weight of the vertically stacked tires off the back axle.16Both Complainant and Respondent Rotan agree that the significance of the telephone conversation was his instruction to Complainant that she should try to bring the load into compliance with the weight restrictions noted earlier, and determine whether the load could be safely transported.17 Further, both the sometimes referred to in trucking jargon as “slamming” or a “slam” maneuver (as used byRespondent Rotan in his text messages with Complainant on the day of the incident). The dissent adopts an unnatural reading of the term “adjust” which is generically used to mean shift, transfer, or move the weight of the load on the rear trailer axle. There are several techniques to accomplish this task.

Complainant and Respondent Rotan agree that Complainant refused to attempt to try to bring the load into compliance.18Finally, Complainant and Respondent Rotan agree that she was instructed not to drive the load once she refused to try to adjust or shift the weight off the rear axle.19 In the words of the Complainant, “He wouldn’t let me take it to the yard; he wouldn’t let me take it anywhere.”20During the course of the texts and the conversation, Complainant refused (at least twice) to attempt to make the load safe for transport.21 As the conversation progressed, Complainant became agitated and yelled at Respondent Rotan.22 As a result of the incident, the Complainant was terminated for insubordination from her employment at Central Cal.233. OSHA ComplaintOn December 21, 2015, Complainant filed a complaint alleging thatRespondents retaliated against her in in violation of the STAA, 49 U.S.C. § 31105(a). On November 18, 2016, OSHA issued its determination under 49 U.S.C. §December 2, 2016, Complainant filed her request for a hearing before a Department of Labor administrative law judge (ALJ).244. Administrative Law Judge Decision and OrderOn June 8, 2017, an ALJ conducted a hearing on the issues presented byComplainant’s complaint.25 On June 19, 2018 the ALJ issued his decision, finding in favor of the Complainant.26 The ALJ concluded that Complainant had engaged in protected activity, and that protected activity had caused and contributed to her termination.  Further, the ALJ concluded Respondents did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that they would have taken the same adverse action in absence of the protected activity.

Pertinent to the appeal before us, the ALJ made several credibility determinations.  The ALJ found Complainant “less than credible in significant portions of her testimony.”27  This included her testimony regarding her alleged safety concerns surrounding attempting to shift the load, as well as her inconsistent testimony regarding the reasons for her firing.  The ALJ did credit some aspects of her testimony, including her belief that trying to shift the load would not make a difference because of the weight of the 600 pound differential.



The Secretary of Labor has delegated authority to the Administrative ReviewBoard to issue agency decisions under the STAA.28 The ARB reviews questions of law presented on appeal de novo, but is bound by the ALJ’s factual determinations as long as they are supported by substantial evidence.29 Substantial evidence means “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion.”30 The Board will uphold ALJ credibility determinations unless they are “inherently incredible or patently unreasonable.”31

Responsibility to the Administrative Review Board (Secretary’s discretionary review of ARB decisions)), 85 Fed. Reg. 13,186 (Mar. 6, 2020); see 29 C.F.R. § 1978.110(a).

ALJ No. 2016-STA-00007, slip op. at 2 (ARB Apr. 30, 2019) (reissued May 9, 2019) (citation omitted).

Retaliation claims under the Surface Transportation Assistance Act (STAA) are determined based on a burden-shifting analysis.32 As we explained in Jeanty v.

Lily Transp. Corp.: 33

To prevail on a STAA claim, a complainant must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he engaged in protected activity, that his employer took an adverse employment action against him, and that the protected activity was a contributing factor in the unfavorable personnel action. 49U.S.C. § 42121(b)(2)(B)(iii); Buie v. Spee-Dee Delivery Serv., Inc., ARB No.

2019-0015, ALJ No. 2014-STA-00037, slip op. at 3 (ARB Oct. 31, 2019). If the employee does not prove one of these requisite elements, the entire claim fails. Riess v. Nucor Corp.-Vulcraft-Texas, Inc., ARB No. 2011-0032,ALJ No. 2008-STA-00011, slip op. at 5 (ARB Dec. 19, 2012) (citation omitted).

1. Protected Activity

Under the complaint clause of the STAA whistleblower statute, a complainant may engage in protected activity by making a complaint “related to a violation of a commercial motor vehicle safety or security regulation, standard, or order . . . .”34 A complainant may also engage in protected activity by refusing to drive under certain conditions. The refusal to drive provision sets out two distinctly different kinds of protected activity. In the first instance, a driver is protected if she refuses to drive because operation of the vehicle would violate a safety regulation; in the second instance, a driver is protected if she refuses to drive because she has a reasonable concern that operation would cause a safety hazard. As the text of the statute provides, “Whistleblower” protection is conferred if:35 (B) the employee refuses to operate a vehicle because— accordance with 49 U.S.C. § 42121(b)(2)(B)).

2020) (per curiam). (i) the operation violates a regulation, standard, or order of the United States related to commercial motor vehicle safety, health, or security; or (ii) the employee has a reasonable apprehension of serious injury to the employee or the public because of the vehicle’s hazardous safety or security condition;Here, the ALJ found Complainant’s refusal to drive on December 18, 2015 constituted protected activity under the complaint clause and the refusal to drive clause because the operation of a vehicle with an overweight rear trailer axle would violate “the commercial vehicle weight regulations at 23 C.F.R. § 658.17, 49 C.F.R. § 392.2, and Cal Veh Code § 35551.”36 According to the ALJ, Respondent Rotan’s error in restating the legal axle weight limit at “34,500,” instead of the accurate limit of 34,000, represented an instruction to drive with weight in excess of the correct limit, and rendered Complainant’s refusal to haul the second load protected.

We hold that the ALJ’s ruling, and his focus on Respondent Rotan’s misstatement, was error, because it ignored credible evidence in the record demonstrating that Complainant’s asserted “refusal to drive” the load was not protected under the STAA.

To appreciate this error, we first note undisputed facts from the record.

Significantly, it is clear that Respondent Rotan never instructed Complainant to operate the vehicle at the 34,600 axle weight it registered at the scales. DespiteRespondent Rotan’s verbal misstatement regarding the legal limit for axle weight, he and Complainant were in agreement that 34,600 pounds was over the limit.37And, although the interpretation of the text messages Respondent Rotan sent toComplainant may be disputed on other grounds, Complainant was actually instructed not to drive the load with an excessive weight of 34,600 pounds resting on the rear axle.38When Respondent Rotan realized that he was being misunderstood by theComplainant, he immediately decided to switch from texting to a telephone conversation in order to clarify that she was not to drive with an overweight rear axle.39 On this point, Complainant testified, “He wouldn’t let me take it to the yard; he wouldn’t let me take it anywhere.”40 This evidence from Complainant’s testimony confirms that she was forbidden to drive the load with an overweight rear axle.41Complainant confirmed in addition that she had never been instructed to drive an overweight load during her employment with Respondent Central Cal.42The undisputed general policy of Respondent Central Cal was for drivers to reject loads that could not be adjusted to comply with legal weight requirements, and to pick up another load or, if none was available, to return without a load.43According to Complainant’s testimony, it was her primary responsibility to try to adjust an overweight load.44 In context, it is the driver who attaches the load, who takes the load to the scales, and who is informed of any overweight conditions.

Further, it is the driver who is best positioned to take reasonable corrective action when safety issues are discovered.

On the record below, the practice of attempting to adjust the weight distribution of a load by momentum was understood by both Complainant andRespondent Rotan not to violate any vehicle codes or DOT regulations, and was common practice for Respondent’s drivers.45 Complainant acknowledged that she had also previously attempted to adjust loads when necessary using the load shifting momentum technique.46 responsibility?” Answer, “One, you find out it’s overweight, you scale it; two, you try to adjust it if you can adjust it.” PDT at 31 (emphasis added).

Complainant testified that the slamming technique does not violate any vehicle codes or DOT regulations.” D. & O. at 15 and 19.

Respondent Rotan repeatedly requested that Complainant attempt the shifting maneuver to redistribute the weight of the second load.47 AlthoughRespondent Rotan and Complainant disagreed as to how much redistribution was necessary, or whether the maneuver would have resulted in a sufficient redistribution to create a legal load, they agreed that he ordered Complainant to try the technique.

Despite Respondent Rotan’s instruction to attempt shift the load,Complainant refused to attempt the maneuver and actually determine how much weight could be redistributed.48 Instead, she chose to drive the load (while overweight) to the Comtrac facility where she dropped it off.49We find it undisputed that Complainant was neither instructed, nor permitted to drive in violation of the axle weight limitations on December 18, 2015.

With 34,600 pounds on the rear axle, she was under a clear order not to drive per her telephone conversation with Respondent Rotan. Complainant disobeyed this order by transporting the load to Comtrac. Even when Complainant refused the order to attempt to shift the load, she admitted in the record that she understood management’s instruction to try to adjust her load represented a standard practice, and was not a violation of any vehicle codes or DOT regulations.

Her refusal to attempt to adjust the weight in spite of repeated requests, rendered the hypothetical question of whether Respondent Rotan would have attempted to compel her to drive irrelevant. Notably, when asked why she did not try the maneuver, and then tell Respondent Rotan that she could not get below the legal limit, she said she did not know why.50If Complainant refused to shift the weight, the question of whether she might have been instructed or required to drive overweight invites mere speculation on the part of the ALJ. The undisputed facts clearly show that the load always remained at 34,600 pounds on the rear axle.  At this weight both parties agreed the vehicle would not be operated.

The ALJ concluded in the D. & O. that Respondent’s order to try to shift weight off of the rear axle before hauling the load “contemplated” an “inherent” violation of the regulations, and rendered Complainant’s refusal to drive under the circumstances protected, because she still would have been over the actual legal limit.51  This conclusion would be relevant only if Respondent had actually instructed Complainant to drive the load overweight.  The question in this case is not a form of words dispute about whether the Respondent might have implicitly instructed Complainant to drive.  Respondent explicitly told Complainant not to drive overweight. Although Respondent Rotan misstated the weight restrictions and confused matters, no interpretation of the evidence before the ALJ supports the inference that Rotan’s factual error amounted to an instruction to drive overweight.52The ALJ also erred as a matter of law in neglecting to considerComplainant’s obligation to attempt to make the load safe and bring the load into regulatory compliance before further operation, regardless of Respondent Rotan’s misstatement regarding the load limit. Adjusting the load is identical to a myriad of tasks that require the driver’s prompt attention while in the field. By way of example, these tasks include the fundamental observation that the driver must fasten his or her seatbelt before operation. The driver must turn-on the headlights after dark, and scrape ice off the windshield.  For each of these tasks, like the obligation to try to adjust the load, there are both regulatory requirements and safety implications. However, it is also true that these safety responsibilities are the obligation of the driver.

Therefore, we conclude that the ALJ erred when he failed to resolve a conflict created by the countervailing evidence that Complainant was never directed to drive an overweight load and that, for that reason alone, she could never have refused to testimony regarding her experience with how much she could redistribute weight with a shifting maneuver. According to Complainant, in her experience, she had only ever shifted less than 100 pounds using the technique. TR at 77. do so.53  “Substantial evidence is relevant evidence that a reasonable mind would accept as adequate to support the [agency’s] conclusion.”54 In Dalton v. Copart, Inc.,55 we held, the substantial evidence standard does not require us to affirm the ALJ’s findings of fact merely because there is evidence in the record which would justify them, without taking into account other - contrary - evidence in the record. Rather, as the Supreme Court held in UniversalCamera v. NLRB, 340 U.S. 474, 488 (1951), “[t]he substantiality of evidence must take into account whatever in the record fairly detracts from its weight.”Similarly, in Bobreski v. J. Givoo Consultants, Inc.,56 we clarified:

The fact finding must “take into account whatever in the record fairly detracts from its weight,” having a sufficient contextual strength. A finding of fact lacks contextual strength and substantial evidence if “the [adjudicator] ignores, or fails to resolve, a conflict created by countervailing evidence” or “if it is overwhelmed by other evidence or if it really constitutes mere conclusion.”As applied, the weight of the evidence here leads to the conclusion thatComplainant was never instructed to drive in violation of the axle weight limitations on December 18, 2015. The ALJ relied on Respondent Rotan’s initialApr. 7, 1993), Collins v. Am. Red Cross, 715 F.3d 994, 998-99 (7th Cir. 2013), Alcala v.

Woodford, 334 F.3d 862, 886-88 (9th Cir. 2003), United States v. Irvin, 682 F.3d 1254, 1274 (10th Cir. 2012).We believe the dissent makes the same analytical error, and again fails to explain how complainant can refuse a task that she was, in fact, never given. While our dissenting colleague mentions “mixed motives” we can find no support for this analysis in the events of this case.

F.3d 1065, 1068 (8th Cir.2000)).

2001).

29, 2014) (internal citations omitted). misstatement of the applicable weight limit, when substantial evidence is required.

Thus, we hold that the ALJ committed reversible error.

2. No Protected Activity to Form a Contributing Factor of CausationIt is axiomatic that without protected activity, there can be no causal relationship between the Respondents and any claim of adverse action. It is clear from the record before us that both Complainant and Respondent Rotan agreed that she would not be allowed to operate the vehicle as long as it was overweight.57 This means that it was Complainant’s refusal to attempt to make the load safe which caused her termination. This refusal cannot be characterized either as protected activity or as a contributing factor under the statute.58Even if Complainant were assumed to have engaged in protected activity by reporting the overweight condition of her load, the ALJ erred in concluding that this asserted protected activity contributed to the decision to terminate her employment.

We take special notice of the ALJ’s discussion of the “intertwined” nature ofComplainant’s alleged protected activity and her termination.59 As we explained inThorstenson, the ARB has recognized that an “inextricably intertwined” or “chain of events” analysis may impede the necessary analysis of the facts and the law.60While we understand that Thorstenson was issued subsequent to the issuance of the decision, the discussion of the intertwined nature of Complainant’s termination and alleged protected activity is in error, because it obscured and oversimplified the evidence in this case.

We find that the ALJ’s analysis of the circumstantial evidence surrounding the termination is in error.  The ALJ notes that the temporal proximity of the firing supports contributing factor causation, relying on her complaints regarding the overweight container and refusal to follow Rotan’s instructions. However, as discussed above, Complainant testified that Rotan never asked her to drive an overweight load. The ALJ specifically concluded that Complainant’s testimony wasFRS-00052, slip op. at 10 (ARB Nov. 25, 2019). The use of analytic tools may create an unjustified merger of events which merit individual consideration. less than credible surrounding why she was fired. The ALJ identified her inconsistent and contradictory testimony regarding whether it was for refusing to attempt to adjust the load, or for driving an overweight load, and that “her contradictions caution against affording her testimony significant weight.”61 TheALJ’s analysis finding that Complainant’s alleged protected conduct was a contributing factor seemingly fails to account for the credibility findings noted above.

The record shows that during the Complainant’s entire employment withRespondent she had previously reported overweight loads and had never been told to drive the load.62 She also had attempted to adjust loads in the past with a momentum shift when she identified a load that was within maximum gross weight, but overweight on the rear axle.63 In each case, while employed by Respondent if the load could not be adjusted, she was instructed to take another load, or if there was no other load available, to return to the facility without a load.64The ALJ noted that “Respondents were not hostile in general to drivers reporting overweight loads.”65 To the contrary, the evidence reflects thatRespondents were accommodating to drivers reporting overweight loads.

Respondent Rotan stressed to Complainant on the day of the incident that he did not want her to drive overweight, and that Respondents had, admittedly, never required her to drive a load that was overweight.66Her refusal to follow her employer’s instruction stands in contrast with her direct testimony that attempting to adjust the load was her part of her obligation as a driver, and that attempting to adjust the load is the immediate corrective action required to make the load safe.67As a result, the ALJ’s conclusion that the circumstantial evidence established contributing factor causation is not supported by substantial evidence in the record.

3. Respondent Central Cal Has Provided Clear and Convincing Evidence itWould Have Taken the Same Action in the Absence of the Claimed RefusalAlternatively, we hold that Respondent has provided clear and convincing evidence that it would have taken the same action in the absence of the claimed refusal based on the Complainant’s insubordination in refusing a direct order to attempt to balance the load.

As we stated in Gordon v. Brindi Trailer and Service, Inc., an employer will have a complete affirmative defense when it can prove “by clear and convincing evidence that it would have taken the same unfavorable personnel action in the absence of the protected activity.”68 Further, the high bar of clear and convincing evidence has been defined as “evidence indicating that the thing to be proved is highly probable or reasonably certain.”69Here, Respondent Central Cal’s affirmative defense is based onComplainant’s insubordination. Insubordination is defined as the “willful and shift the load was merely a “practice,” and therefore could not be considered a “policy.”Although we hold this semantic point to be a distinction without a difference, the record establishes that shifting the weight of cargo using this procedure actually was theRespondent’s “policy.” In this case, policy is simply a practice that has ripened into an expectation of management. Beyond question Complainant’s past use of the technique, its customary use by other drivers at the company, coupled with Respondent Rotan’s direct instruction, demonstrate that the shifting technique was an expectation of management and therefore a “policy.” We note that the dissent explicitly concedes that if Respondent’s instruction to the Claimant concerned a “policy,” then Complainant’s failure to comply broke any conceivable chain of causation arising from the alleged protected activity.

STA-00019 slip op. at 5 (ARB Mar. 13, 2020)(per curiam); accord Coryell v. Ark. EnergyServs., LLC, ARB No. 2012-0033, ALJ No. 2010-STA-00042 (ARB Apr. 25, 2013). fn. 99 (3rd Cir. 2017)(quoting Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2009). intentional refusal [emphasis supplied] to obey an authorized order of a superior officer which the officer is entitled to have obeyed.”70 During the course of the hearing, Respondent introduced substantial evidence that it had a disciplinary action policy that included the remedy of termination for insubordination.71The evidence in the record shows that Complainant was insubordinate. She received an unambiguous, authorized order to attempt to shift the load. She failed to show that order was illegal, and the ALJ discredited her contention that she believed at the time that the maneuver under the circumstances would have been unsafe. In the proceedings below, she offered no credible explanation for why she would not attempt to shift the load, other than her personal belief that it would not have resulted in a sufficient redistribution of the weight to make the load legal. Her subjective belief in the futility of the exercise does not excuse her from engaging in what was an unobjectionable task that was within her means and experience to try.

Separately, Complainant also admitted that her conduct in yelling at her supervisor was both inappropriate and possible grounds for termination.72In this case, the ALJ erred when he identified the correct legal standard, but then applied it incorrectly to the underlying facts.73 The ALJ cites the employee handbook, and notes the evidence that the Complainant was very combative at times. Indeed, the ALJ went so far as to confirm that “[t]he record reflects thatComplainant was hostile and insubordinate to her supervisor, an attitude that manifested at her deposition.”74 However he found that this evidence was insufficient to prove that Respondent “would have terminated Complainant for insubordination absent her complaint about the overweight load.”75S.Ct. 1037, 19 L.Ed.2d 1139; Gallagher v. Dep’t of Labor, 10 M.S.P.B. 528, 11 M.S.P.R. 612 (1982). supervisor’s orders or other insubordination, restricting, slowing down or interfering with production or causing, advising, or directing others to do so.” TR at 44. Violation of the policy included disciplinary action, “Up to and including termination.” Id. banc).

The ALJ erred in his consideration of key facts: Complainant refused a direct order to attempt to make the load safe, and also drove the unsafe load to Comtrac, contrary to a direct order not to drive the load anywhere. During the course of this series of insubordinate events, the Complainant became combative and yelled at her supervisor. As a result, Respondent Rotan was faced with a complete rejection of his authority to control a driver and to mitigate an unsafe condition.76 As a result, it isComplainant’s insubordination in refusing to attempt to make the load safe, coupled with her open hostility towards her supervisor, that provides clear and convincing evidence of Respondents’ complete affirmative defense.77

The record does not support the ALJ’s conclusion that Respondents subjectedPoulter to an adverse employment action in retaliation for engaging in STAA- protected activity. Accordingly, we REVERSE the ALJ’s Decision and Order,VACATE the ALJ’s award of relief, and DISMISS Poulter’s complaint.

SO ORDERED.

1
