

  This case arises under the whistleblower protection provision of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (ERA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 5851 (2005), and as implemented by regulations codified at complaint with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) alleging that his employer, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC or Commission), violated the ERA when it failed to select him for a vacant Senior Resident Inspector position at the Callaway Nuclear Plant. OSHA denied the complaint and Peck requested a hearing before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).

Prior to any hearing, NRC filed a Motion to Dismiss Peck’s complaint because “under longstanding principles of sovereign immunity and precedential case law of the Department of Labor Administrative Review Board, the Office of Administrative Law Judges lacks subject-matter jurisdiction over this action brought under [the ERA].”1 On July 13, 2017, the ALJ issued an Order in which he concluded that he did not have jurisdiction in this case because although “[t]he NRC is an instrumentality of the U.S. Government which through the laws of the United States permits certain actions under a waiver of sovereign immunity … [t]he United States has not waived sovereign immunity for ERA whistleblower actions.”2 Peck appealed the Order to the Administrative Review Board (ARB or Board). Due to the significance of the issue to be considered, the Chief Administrative Appeals Judge designated this case for en banc consideration. For the following reasons we affirm the ALJ.



Congress has authorized the Secretary of Labor to issue final agency decisions with respect to claims of discrimination and retaliation filed under the ERA.3 The Secretary has delegated that authority to the Board.4 The Board reviews an ALJ’s conclusions of law, including whether to deny a complaint on a motion to dismiss, de novo.5 at 4. Responsibility to the Administrative Review Board), 84 Fed. Reg. 13,072 (Apr. 3, 2019); see (ARB Nov. 17, 2011).



Peck raises the following issues on appeal: (1) Whether the language of the ERA clearly and unambiguously waives sovereign immunity for the Commission; and (2) If the ARB determines that the statutory language is ambiguous, “is there evidence to demonstrate Congress intended to waive sovereign immunity?”6 The NRC maintains its argument that the United States has not waived sovereign immunity for ERA whistleblower claims.7 We agree with the NRC and will deny Peck’s complaint because the whistleblower protection provision of the ERA, as amended, does not contain an unequivocal expression of an intent to waive sovereign immunity.



We begin with a review of the text of the relevant laws. Congress first regulated the creation and use of nuclear energy in the Atomic Energy Act (AEA) of 1946, which established the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). It was amended by the AEA of 1954, which allowed private construction, ownership, and operation of commercial nuclear power reactors under AEC supervision. The provisions of the AEA of 1954 were codified in Chapter 23 of Title 42 of the United States Code.

Congress passed the ERA in 1974 as part of its continuing effort to regulate nuclear energy. The ERA’s provisions were placed in Chapter 73, a new chapter of Title 42 of the United States Code. The ERA abolished the AEC and created two new entities to take its place – the NRC and the Energy Research and Development Administration. In adopting the ERA, Congress did not repeal the provisions of Chapter 23.

In 1978, Congress amended the ERA to prohibit employers from discriminating against employees who report violations of the ERA or the AEA or who participate in any other action to carry out the purposes of those acts. It also established processes and remedies to redress such discrimination.

Review at 7-10.

Finally, in 2005, Congress added the NRC to the definition of “employer” under the ERA but failed to identify the NRC or any other governmental entities as a “person” from whom relief may be sought. The anti-retaliation provision of the ERA which prohibits certain employer conduct was codified at 42 U.S.C. § 5851(a)(1) and provides as follows: (1) No employer may discharge any employee or otherwise discriminate against any employee with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because the employee (or any person acting pursuant to a request of the employee) – (A) notified his employer of an alleged violation of this chapter or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.); (B) refused to engage in any practice made unlawful by this chapter or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 [42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.], if the employee has identified the alleged illegality to the employer; (C) testified before Congress or at any Federal or State proceeding regarding any provision (or proposed provision) of this chapter or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 [42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.]; (D) commenced, caused to be commenced, or is about to commence or cause to be commenced a proceeding under this chapter or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended [42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.], or a proceeding for the administration or enforcement of any requirement imposed under this chapter or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended; (E) testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding or; (F) assisted or participated or is about to assist or participate in any manner in such a proceeding or in any other manner in such a proceeding or in any other action to carry out the purposes of this chapter or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended [42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.].8For purposes of § 5851, the term “employer” includes specified entities identified below: (A) a licensee of the Commission or of an agreement State under section 274 of the Atomic Energy Act of (B) an applicant for a license from the Commission or such an agreement State; (C) a contractor or subcontractor of such a licensee or applicant; (D) a contractor or subcontractor of the Department of Energy that is indemnified by the Department under section 170 d. of the Atomic Energy Act of include any contractor or subcontractor covered by Executive Order No. 12344; (E) a contractor or subcontractor of the Commission; (F) the Commission; and (G) the Department of Energy.9We now shift our analysis. The remedy provision of the ERA establishes specific processes for filing, investigating, and adjudicating employee complaints: (b)    Complaint, filing and notification (1) Any employee who believes that he has been discharged or otherwise discriminated against by any person in violation of subsection (a) of this section may, within 180 days after such violation occurs, file (or have any person file on his behalf) a complaint with the Secretary of Labor (in this section referred to as the “Secretary”) alleging such discharge or discrimination. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the Secretary shall notify the person named in the complaint of the filing of the complaint, the Commission, and the Department of Energy. (2)(A) Upon receipt of a complaint filed under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall conduct an investigation of the violation alleged in the complaint. Within thirty days of the receipt of such complaint, the Secretary shall complete such investigation and shall notify in writing the complainant (and any person acting in his behalf) and the person alleged to have committed such violation of the results of the investigation conducted pursuant to this subparagraph. Within ninety days of the receipt of such complaint the Secretary shall, unless the proceeding on the complaint is terminated by the Secretary on the basis of a settlement entered into by the Secretary and the person alleged to have committed such violation, issue an order either providing the relief prescribed by subparagraph (B) or denying the complaint. An order of the Secretary shall be made on the record after notice and opportunity for public hearing. Upon the conclusion of such hearing and the issuance of a recommended decision that the complaint has merit, the Secretary shall issue a preliminary order providing the relief prescribed in subparagraph (B), but may not order compensatory damages pending a final order. The Secretary may not enter into a settlement terminating a proceeding on a complaint without the participation and consent of the complainant.10We reach the end of our statutory review with the passage below concerning the application of penalties under the ERA for violations of the Act. If the Secretary (or his delegates) concludes that a violation has occurred, remedies may be ordered against the person who committed the violation: (B) If, in response to a complaint . . . the Secretary determines that a violation of subsection (a) . . . has occurred, the Secretary shall order the person who committed the violation to (i) take affirmative action to abate the violation, and (ii) reinstate the complainant to his former position together with . . .  compensation . . . and the Secretary may order such person to provide compensatory damages to the complainant. If an order is issued under this paragraph, the Secretary, at the request of the complainant shall assess against the person against whom the order is issued a sum equal to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including attorneys’ and expert witness fees) reasonably incurred, as determined by the Secretary, by the complainant for, or in connection with, the bringing of the complaint upon which the order was issued.11In sum, the text of the ERA presents a semantic challenge to the reader: the anti-retaliation provision of the Act constrains certain “employer” conduct toward employees, while the remedy provision allows an employee to obtain relief from discriminatory conduct by “any person.” And while “employer” is defined by statute to include the U.S. Department of Labor and the NRC, there is no similar definition or any statutory cross-reference for the word “person” as used in the remedy provision. The relationship between the words “employer” and “person” is, at best, ambiguous12 and requires the use of traditional interpretive tools to clarify the relationship, if any, between the two words and the intent of the legislature in using dissimilar words in related parts of the ERA. As will be seen, this analysis will be critical to our resolution of the question as to whether Congress has waived the sovereign immunity of the federal government in connection with whistleblower complaints under the ERA. dissenting colleague, or does the use of different words in related parts of a statute evince different meanings for each?.

Sovereign immunity shields the federal government and its agencies from suit absent a waiver by the government.13 The extent of the federal government’s waiver of sovereign immunity and the types of damages allowable are authorized and defined by the language of the waiver, and that language is to be narrowly construed.14 Moreover, the waiver must be established by the statute itself.15 Waivers of sovereign immunity must be “unequivocally expressed”16 and are strictly construed in favor of the United States.17 The immunity applies in administrative adjudications as well as adjudications in the federal courts.18To determine if sovereign immunity has been waived, we must focus on the statutory text that relates to liability.19  And for Peck’s case to proceed, we mustWilliams, 514 U.S. 527, 531 (1995) (“Although neither of these conceivable readings of § 1003(a)(2) [of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973] is entirely satisfactory, their existence points up a fact fatal to Lane’s argument: Section 1003(a) is not so free from ambiguity that we can comfortably conclude, based thereon, that Congress intended to subject the Federal Government to awards of monetary damages for violations of § 504(a) of the Act. Given the care with which Congress responded to our decision in Atascadero by crafting an unambiguous waiver of the States’ Eleventh Amendment immunity in § 1003, it would be ironic indeed to conclude that that same provision “unequivocally” establishes a waiver of the Federal Government’s sovereign immunity against monetary damages awards by means of an admittedly ambiguous reference to “public ... entit[ies]” in the remedies provision attached to the unambiguous waiver of the States’ sovereign immunity.”). legislative history cannot supply a waiver that does not appear clearly in any statutory text:  ‘the “unequivocal expression” of elimination of sovereign immunity that we insist upon is an expression in statutory text.’”). (1980) (citing United States v. King, 395 U. S. 1 (1969)). 2001-ERA-00041 (ARB Sept. 29, 2003), slip op. at 4, citing Pastor v. Dep’t of Veterans Affairs, ARB No. 99-071, ALJ No. 1999-ERA-011 (ARB May 30, 2003), slip op. at 6 (“To sustain a claim that the Government is liable for awards of monetary damages, the waiver of sovereign immunity must extend unambiguously to such monetary claims.”). Peck determine whether Congress has waived the federal government’s (and specifically, the NRC’s) sovereign immunity under the ERA. As noted previously, the anti- retaliation provision of the ERA prohibits any “employer,” as defined therein, from retaliating against any employee who engages in any of the protected activities set forth therein. But the remedy provision allows for remedies only against “persons,” a term of art that generally excludes the federal government.20 The Supreme Court has recently affirmed the “longstanding interpretive presumption” that the word “person” excludes federal agencies.21We note that “person” is defined in the Atomic Energy Act (AEA) to include any “Government agency,” and the argument can be made that the definition should extend to the ERA. However, the AEA definition of “person” is, by the terms of the applicable definitions section, expressly limited to that chapter of the AEA.22   The limiting language noted in the AEA means that in this case the term “person” must be construed as it is used in the ERA and as part of a discrete legal regime, distinct from the AEA.23 But even if we were to conclude that AEA definition of “person” asserts that he “seeks, essentially, equitable damages of transfer into the position he applied for,”  but he also seeks monetary damages in the form of “wages, bonuses and other job-related benefits associated with the position he would have been eligible to receive” if he had been selected for the vacant position. See Initial Brief at 4. of “person”). (“The Dictionary Act has since 1947 provided the definition of ‘person’ that courts use ‘[i]n determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, unless the context indicates otherwise.’ 1 U.S.C. § 1 … The Act provides that the word “‘person’ ... include[s] corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies, and joint stock companies, as well as individuals.” § 1. Notably absent from the list of ‘person[s]’ is the Federal Government.”). section should be construed from the words or phrases used in the definitions. As used in this chapter ... (s) The term “person” means (1) any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, Government agency other than the Commission, any State or any political subdivision of, or any political entity within a State, any foreign government or nation or any political subdivision of any such government or nation, or other entity; and (2) any legal successor, representative, agent, or agency of the foregoing.”). through the ERA and transfer to them functions given to other bodies by the AEA, it did not transfer or otherwise incorporate the definitions of the AEA. This is particularly notable because Congress did specifically incorporate into the ERA (and Chapter 73) certain other raises an inference as to Congressional intent concerning the ERA, that inference merely creates a debatable point, at most, and falls short of the unequivocal expression the Supreme Court requires to establish  a waiver of federal sovereign immunity.24In Mull v. Salisbury Veterans Admin. Med. Ctr.,25 the Board rejected the argument that the AEA definition of person applied to the ERA.26 The board also concluded that it could not assume that because a respondent is an “employer” under the anti-retaliation provision, it is also a “person” under the remedy provision.27 The Board compared the whistleblower protection provision of the ERA to the one contained in the Clean Air Act, which clearly indicates Congress’ intent to waive the federal government’s sovereign immunity: references … Congress has continued to treat the AEA and the ERA (and Chapters 23 and adopt the whistleblower provision of § 5851 as an amendment to the ERA, which contains no definition of “person,” rather than as an amendment to the AEA, which contains a definition, cannot be ignored.”). different from that of the ERA in its definition of “person” as applied to federal agencies because Congress intended to convey a different meaning. The AEA language may be read to show that Congress knew how to waive sovereign immunity for the AEA and intentionally declined to do so in the ERA. There is no explicit justification for this, not illogical, interpretation and we decline to adopt it in preference to other equally unjustified theories. language, to the AEA’s definition of “person” to find that the federal government has waived its immunity under the ERA. However, we can find no language in the ERA that expressly requires or directs us to look outside of the act. While the Supreme Court has “never required that Congress make its clear statement in a single section or in statutory provisions enacted at the same time,” Kimel v. Florida, 528 U.S. 62, 76 (2000), the Court has required that Congress make a clear statement in the statutory text, even if simply by including in the statute, language that incorporates provisions from other statutes. Lane, construction ‘that to the extent possible all Congressional provisions are to be given meaning, and that when Congress uses two different words in close proximity, the use of different words indicates a difference in meaning.’”).

The lack of clarity in 42 U.S.C.A. § 5851’s provision that an employee can bring a complaint against “any person,” with “person” being undefined is underscored by the precision with which Congress waived the Federal Government’s sovereign immunity under 42 U.S.C.A. § 7622 (Thomson/West 2003) of the Clean Air Act, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of protected activity under the Clean Air Act in employment decisions by the Federal Government. In 42 U.S.C. § 7622, Congress allows an employee to file a CAA complaint with OSHA against “any person in violation of” the CAA whistleblower provisions. In 42 U.S.C. § 7602(e), “person” is defined to include “any agency, department, or instrumentality of the United States,” thereby unequivocally expressing the intent to waive the federal government’s sovereign immunity. In contrast, 42 U.S.C.A. § 5851’s lack of any language including the federal government as an entity against which complaints can be filed or otherwise waiving its sovereign immunity, tends to suggest that Congress did not intend the federal government’s sovereign immunity to be waived.28Our dissenting colleague nevertheless raises a number of plausible arguments concerning the intent of Congress in this regard, focusing primarily upon the 2005 amendment to the ERA that subjected the NRC to the Act’s anti- retaliation provisions as circumstantial evidence of a further intent to allow suit against the NRC if it violated those provisions.29 But more than plausibility is required by the law.30 As we have previously noted, “[w]hen one reading of a statutory text could plausibly support a finding of waiver, but another reading thatERA should be read as just that. To give effect to that addition it is not necessary to further assume that Congress made a tacit addition to the definition of person. Likewise, an addition to the list of employers under the Act does not necessitate an assumption that Congress intended to waive sovereign immunity. Our judgment on this point is strongly influenced by our recognition that Congress retains the power to legislate on the question before us and to unequivocally resolve the matter. We have no warrant to substitute our interpretive efforts for the legislative authority of Congress. monetary liability on the Government is not ‘unambiguous’ and therefore should not be adopted.” United States v. Nordic Village, 503 U.S. 30, 37 (1992). is incompatible with waiver is also plausible, the latter must prevail. That is because the very presence of ambiguity precludes a finding of waiver.”31 The ambiguity in the statutory text at issue here, considered in favor of the sovereign, compels us to conclude that the ERA does not contain an unequivocal expression of legislative intent to waive immunity.32

We hold that the whistleblower protection provision of the ERA does not contain an unequivocal expression of intent to waive sovereign immunity, and, as such, the United States has not waived sovereign immunity for ERA whistleblower claims. We therefore conclude that the ALJ’s decision was correct in law and should be AFFIRMED. Accordingly, we DENY Peck’s complaint.

SO ORDERED.