

The Complainant, Jack Jordan, filed a retaliation complaint with the Department of Labor’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) under Section 806 of the Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability Act of 2002, Title VIII of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act,1  and its implementing regulations.2Complainant alleged that DynCorp International (DynCorp) and its attorneys violated his rights under SOX by seeking a protective order on the grounds of privilege concerning two emails in an unrelated case, whileAdministrative Law Judges Almanza and Merck (the Respondent Judges) violated his rights by declining to order the release of the contents of the two emails in previous decisions. OSHA determined that the Respondent Judges were not covered parties under SOX, and the allegations appear to be duplicative of issues that have been raised or are pending in another claim. Thus, the Administrator dismissed the complaint. Complainant objected and the case was referred to the Office ofAdministrative Law Judges (OALJ) at Complainant’s request. The AdministrativeLaw Judge (ALJ) granted the Respondents’ motions to dismiss based onComplainant’s failure to state a claim and specifically notes that Complainant has not alleged any adverse action by any respondent that discriminates against him “in the terms and conditions of employment.” In addition, the ALJ found that theRespondent Judges in this case are entitled to absolute immunity from suit and liability for their judicial acts. Complainant filed a petition for review of this decision with the Administrative Review Board (ARB) which was not accepted.

The ALJ also issued an Order Imposing Sanctions and Attorneys’ Fees (April 9, 2018). The ALJ found that sanctions were necessary and thus admonishedComplainant against making legal contentions that are unwarranted by either existing law or by an argument for extending, modifying, or reversing existing law or for establishing new law.3 In addition, the ALJ ordered Complainant to pay toRespondent DynCorp the sum of $1,000.00, as reasonable attorneys’ fees. The ALJ denied Complainant’s motion for reconsideration. Complainant filed a petition requesting that the Administrative Review Board (ARB) review the ALJ’s order and the denial of reconsideration. We granted that petition and now affirm.4Complainant’s subsequent appeal, ARB No. 18-0035, for purposes of rendering a decision.

We have determined that judicial efficiency would be better served by separating the appeals and issuing individual decisions. Thus, this decision will only address the appealARB No. 19-0027.

The Secretary of Labor has delegated authority to the Administrative ReviewBoard to issue agency decisions under the SOX.5 The ARB reviews the ALJ’s factual findings for substantial evidence, and conclusions of law de novo.6 In considering a dismissal for failure to state a claim, the ARB must accept the non-moving party’s factual allegations as true and draw all reasonable inferences in the non-moving party’s favor.7Upon review of the ALJ’s Order Imposing Sanctions and Attorney’s Fees and the Decision and Order Declining to Reconsider Imposition of Sanctions andAttorney’s Fees, and the parties’ arguments, we conclude that the ALJ’s decision is in accordance with the law and is well-reasoned. As a result, we ADOPT andATTACH the ALJ’s decisions.8Accordingly, the ALJ’s Order imposing sanctions and awarding Respondent an attorney’s fee to be paid by Complainant is AFFIRMED.

SO ORDERED.

JORDAN_JACK_v_DYNCORP_INTERNATIONA_2017SOX00055_(APR_09_2018)_125508_ORDER_PD