



This case arises unde,r the, Energy Re()rganization Aet of 1974 (ERA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. ยง 5851 (2005), and as implemented hy regulations codified at 29 C.F.R. .Part 24 (2019). The Compillinrmt, Laurent ,J. Brown, filed a complaint with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) alleging that his employer, BWSR, LLC. the ReHpondent, terminated his employment after he engaged in protected activity, in violation of the ERA's whiHtleblower provisions. OSH..A.. found that there was no reasonable cause to believe that BV.'SR violated the ER.A's whistleblower provisions because Complainant did not make a prima facie showing that his work refusal was protected activity under the ERA. Complainant requested a hearing before an Admmistrative Law Judge (."i.LJ), who granted Respondent's motion for summary decision because Respondent is not an "employer" under 42 U.S.C .. ~~r:il(a)(2). 1 We affirm, adopting and attaching the ALJ's order.





The Secretary of Labor has delegated to the Administrative Review Hoard (ARB) authority to review ALJ decisions in cases arising under the ERA and issue finnl agoncy decisions in these matters.~ The ARB reviews an A.LJ's grant of summary decision de novo, applying the same standard that ALJs employ.3 Pursuant to 29 C .. F.R. ยง 18.72 (2019), summary decision must be entered if the pleadings, affidavits, material obtained by discovery, or matters officially noticed show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that a party is entitled to summary decision.



Upon review of the ALJ's grant of summary decision, we conclude that it is a reasoned ruling based on the undisputed facts and the applicable law. The ALJ properly concluded that Respondent falls under the exclusion in the statute at ยง5851(a)(2)(ll) such that it is not an employer under the ERA because it is a subcontractor covered hy Executive Order 12344. Thus, the ALJ properly concluded that Respondent has e~tablishcd that there is no isdue as to a genuine issue of material fact and is entitled to summary decision as a matter of law.

Accordingly, we adopt and attach the ALJ's Order Granting Respondent's .Motion for Summary Decision.

SO ORDERED.
.

'

