

 The Complainant, Benjamin Kuhaulua, filed a retaliation complaint under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (WPCA) and its implementing regulations. 33 U.S.C. ยง 1367 (1972); 29 C.F.R. Part 24 (2019). Complainant alleged that his employer, County of Kaua'i Solid Waste Division, violated the WPCA whistleblower protection provisions by withholding his paycheck for four days and constructively discharging him from employment.

On July 8, 2017, Respondent filed a motion for summary decision asserting that any delay that occurred in Complainant receiving his paycheck was a result of the postal service and that Complainant was still an employee and therefore could not have been constructively discharged. 1 Thus, Respondent argued that there was no adverse action in the case as a matter of law. 2Complainant filed an opposition to the motion for summary decision including no evidence of any kind and citing no legal authority. In his opposition Complainant abandoned the theory of adverse action based on an alleged four-day delay in receiving a check as he offered no argument to dispute Respondent's arguments. Regarding the constructive discharge allegation, Complainant argued that the Respondent's retention of Complainant on temporary total disability status amounted to constructive termination.

On July 28, 2017, the ALJ granted Respondent's motion for summary decision, concluding as a matter of law that Complainant failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Respondent took any adverse action against him. Complainant filed a petition requesting that the Administrative Review Board (ARB or the Board) review the ALJ's order. We affirm.



The WPCA's employee-protection provision authorizes the Secretary of Labor to hear complaints of alleged discrimination because of protected activity and, upon finding a violation, to order abatement and other remedies. 33 U.S.C. ยง 1367. The Secretary has delegated authority to the Administrative Review Board (ARB or the Board) to review an ALJ's decision. Secretary's Order No. 01-2020 (Delegation ofRespondent submitted evidence Complainant is on temporary leave for a disability related to workers' compensation and that it will return Complainant to his prior job as soon as he provides Respondent with a medical release. D. & 0. at 8. In response, Complainant offered no proof of constructive discharge. Id.

Complainant's protected activity was not a motivating factor in that delay. D. & 0. at 2-3. The ALJ did not address this argument in the D. & 0.

Authority and Assignment of Responsibility to the Administrative Review Board) (Feb. 21, 2020).

Under the Administrative Procedure Act, the ARB, as the Secretary's designee, acts with all the powers the Secretary would possess in rendering a decision under the whistleblower statutes. The ARB engages in de novo review of the ALJ's decision granting summary decision. See 5 U.S.C. ยง 557(b) (1976); Griffo v. Book Dog Books, LLC, ARB No. 18-029, ALJ No. 2016-SOX-041 (ARB May 2, 2019). Summary decision is permitted where "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to decision as a matter of law." 29 C.F.R. ยง 18. 72(a) (2017). On summary decision, the ALJ, in the first instance and the Board on appeal must review the record in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Micallef v. Harrah's Rincon Casino & Resort, ARB No. 16-095, ALJ No. 2015- SOX-025, slip op. at 3 (ARB July 5, 2018).

CONCLUSION

The ALJ's decision is in accordance with law. For the reasons stated by the ALJ, Kuhaulua failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Respondent engaged in any adverse action against him. On appeal, Complainant has failed to raise any genuine issue of material fact with respect to the issue of adverse action as presented to the ALJ. Accordingly, we adopt the ALJ's well-reasoned Order Granting Summary Decision on Reconsideration and attach a copy hereto.

SO ORDERED.


