


This case arises under the employee protection provisions of the SurfaceTransportation Assistance Act of 1982 (STA/\) as amended. 49 U.S.C. ยง 31105(a) (2007); see also 29 C.F.R. Part 1978 (2018) (the STAA's implementing regulations). Shawn Jennings filed a complaint with the United States Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) on September 13, 2016, alleging that his employer, McLane Company, Incorporated, violated the employee protection provisions of the STAA when it terminated his employment in retaliation for raising safety concerns. A Department of Labor Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) issued a Decision and Order (D. & 0.) Granting Respondent's Motion for Summary Decision concluding that Complainant failed to demonstrate the existence of any disputed material fact on an essential element of the claim. Complainant appealed the ALJ's decision.



Complainant began working as a driver for McLane in 2000. For fifteen years, Complainant was not written up for working instead of sleeping in the berth, a common practice according to Complainant. Complainant made several complaints of safety issues, including at a company-drivers meeting in November 2015. Thereafter, Complainant received his first infraction after an audit in December 2015 and another one in March 2016. On March 28, 2016, Complainant resigned his employment.

Complainant filed a complaint with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) on September 13, 2016 where he alleged that he was terminated in retaliation for reporting safety issues at every quarterly drivers' meeting since 2009. OSHA dismissed his complaint and Complainant requested a hearing before the Office of Administrative Law Judges.

The ALJ, in the D. & 0. on May 4, 2017, concluded there was not an issue of material fact regarding whether Complainant was subjected to a hostile work environment or that Respondent acted in such a manner that would communicate to Complainant he would be terminated, an action amounting to a constructive discharge. The ALJ relied, in part, on Dietz u. Cypress Semiconductor Corp., ARB No. 15-017, ALJ No. 2014-SOX-002 (March 30, 2016).



The Administrative Review Board (ARB or Board) has jurisdiction to review the ALJ's STAA decision pursuant to Secretary's Order No. 01-2019 (Delegation of Authority and Assignment of Responsibility to the Administrative Review Board),The following material is taken from the ALJ's order and the pleadings and depositions associated with the parties' summary decision motions.

The ARB reviews an ALJ's grant of summary decision de novo, applying the same standard that ALJs employ under 29 C.F.R. Part 18.2 Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. ยง 18.72, an ALJ must enter summary judgment for a party if the pleadings, affidavits, material obtained by discovery, or matters officially noticed show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the party is entitled to summary decision.



Our consideration of the larger issue of constructive discharge is limited by the posture of the case before us. 3 The ALJ disposed of the claim by summary decision. In deciding on such a motion, the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. When deciding whether to grant a motion for summary decision, we do not weigh the evidence to determine the truth of the matters asserted. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 249 (1986) (observing "it is clear ... that at the summary judgment stage the judge's function is not himself to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial.")The Board has held that "a genuine issue exists if a fair-minded fact-finder could rule for the nonmoving party after hearing all the evidence, recognizing that in hearings, testimony is tested by cross-examination and amplified by exhibits and presumably more context." Henderson v. Wheeling & Lake Erie Ry., ARB No. 11- 013, ALJ No. 2010-FRS-012, slip op. at 7-8 (ARB Oct. 26, 2012); see Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. at 248. It is important to note that denying summary decision because there is a genuine dispute as to a material fact simply means that an evidentiary hearing is required to resolve those issues; it is not an assessment on the merits of any particular claim or defense. Henderson, ARB No. 11-013, slip op. at 9. We conduct de novo review to decide whether the ALJ was correct in his " Siemaszko v. FirstEnergy Nuclear Operating Co., Inc., ARB No. 09-123, ALJ No. 2003- ERA-013, slip op. at 3 (ARB Feb. 29, 2012). as a statement of the law of constructive discharge. However, we believe it premature to analyze Dietz considering the present posture of this case and the limited record presented. What is before us at this time is whether the ALJ's summary decision is appropriate in light of the evidence submitted and whether there is a genuine issue of material fact. We decline to go further. conclusion that no evidentiary hearing was necessary because there was no dispute as to any material fact. Our review of the record in the instant case discloses several disputed material facts.

We note that the record contains conflicting evidence on the issue of possible constructive discharge that requires further proceedings for resolution before the ALJ. To establish constructive discharge, a complainant must show "working conditions [that] were so difficult or unpleasant that a reasonable person in the employee's shoes would have found continued employment intolerable and would have been compelled to resign." Brown v. Lockheed Martin, Corp., ARB No. 10-050, ALJ No. 2008-SOX-049, slip op. at 10 (ARB Feb. 28, 2011). Specifically, we note that in his response to the motion for summary decision, Complainant submitted a declaration of Anthony Phelps, a Corporate Safety Inspector and Jennings's supervisor for seven years. Mr. Phelps stated that safety inspectors/dispatchers can target individuals for safety checks and that Jennings was one of the drivers targeted because he was vocal about things he thought were unsafe or illegal. Phelps Declaration at 2. He also stated that management tried to portray Jennings as a troublemaker and as disruptive and that he heard management state that they did not like Jennings and they wanted him fired. Id. In addition, the file contains the following deposition testimony of Jennings that after the first infraction on December 7, 2015, he went to an informal meeting where he was told that "You're on written notice. If you get another one within six months, you're terminated." Jennings Deposition at 131. He also noted that it was not McLane's policy that you "could" be terminated for a second infraction within six months, but rather that you would be terminated. Id. In addition, the file contains the declaration of Scott Braden, President of the Southwest Division during relevant time, in which he states that Jennings resigned because he was aware that his violations of FMSCA's hours-of-service requirements were terminable offenses. Braden Deposition at 5.

The record also contains the hearing transcript for proceedings before the Texas Workforce Commission (TWC). Although the ALJ correctly found that he was not bound by the decision of the TWC because it is based on different legal standards, he did not address the factual testimony provided during the proceeding that contradicts the declarations presented to support summary decision. Specifically, Carole Bennett, McLane's Human Resources Manager, testified that a major infraction such as this one requires one final waning and then termination for the second infraction, 1 and Danny Rimburg, Jennings's immediate supervisor, testified that but for Complainant's quitting on March 28, he would have been fired. 5 The pleadings and evidence submitted in response to the motion for summary decision also includes the original complaint in which Jennings contends that he was given the ultimatum to quit or be fired and the Payroll Administrative Form "Stop payment" dated March 28, 2016 which states that Jennings payment were stopped due to termination.

While the ALJ extensively discussed the undisputed evidence supporting Respondent's motion for summary decision, he did not address any of the conflicting evidence. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, a reasonable fact finder could find that Jennings's resignation was a constructive discharge. Because Jennings has clearly alleged facts about which there remains genuine dispute, we conclude that the ALJ erred in granting summary decision for Respondent.



For the foregoing reasons, the ALJ's Decision and Order Granting Respondent's Motion for Summary Decision is VACATED and this case is REMANDED to the ALJ for further proceedings consistent with this Decision and Order of Remand.

SO ORDERED.


